API documentation (#5)
paastech-cloud/docs: Architecture.md

### Description and intent

**_TODO: [UNIFIED WORK] write description of the software and its intent (what market needs it answers to)_**

### Technologies

Below are the technologies used for the different components of the application. We will discuss the choices that we made, and why the chosen technology fits in the ecosystem.

A list of TPMs (Third-Party Modules) might be written to give more insight about the component, but please keep in mind those lists are non-exhaustive and only the main TPMs are described.

**_TODO: [UNIFIED WORK] define the different technologies below, why they were chosen, and use arguments AND PROOFS to show research_**

#### Web application

**_TODO: [CLIENT] fill for web application frontend_**

#### CLI (Command-Line Interface)

**_TODO: [CLIENT] fill for the cli_**

#### Client API

> The Client API is one of the fundamental parts of our project. It not only handles all Client interactions, but is also the only application that can write any data in the shared database. It notifies [Pomegranate](#client-applications-deployment), the deployment manager, each time a project needs to be deployed and lets a user add their SSH keys to be able to connect to the local Git server. Every user request is send and verified by the API before being carried out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Client API is one of the fundamental parts of our project. It not only handles every Client interactions, but is also the only application that can write any data in the shared database. It notifies [Pomegranate](#client-applications-deployment), the deployment manager, each time a project needs to be deployed and lets a user add their SSH keys to be able to connect to the local Git server. Every user request is sent and verified by the API before being carried out.
```

> With this API being such an important part of the project for the Client, the choice of language and frameworks was very important to allow for maximal performance. It is made using [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) with [NestJS](https://nestjs.com/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this API being such an important part of the project for the Client, the choice of language and frameworks was very important to allow for maximal performance. It is made using [NestJS](https://nestjs.com/) with [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/).
```

- NestJS-express is nearly on par with Express for the average response time (`65.44 ms` versus `61.88 ms`)
- NestJS-express is twice as fast in maximum response time (only `325 ms` against Express' `747 ms`)
- NestJS-express can handle nearly twice as many requests concurrently, for the minimum amount doable (`14183 req/s` versus `8407 req/s`)
- NestJS-express is on par with Express for the number of requests handled concurrently, for the average amount doable (`15640` versus `16454.41`)

The API is currently running on NestJS-express v10.0.3, which has just been released. Two years have passed since the last benchmarks, and we can expect NestJS to be even faster as of now.

##### Authentication strategies

Regarding the authentication strategy, our team decided to create a `GET /auth/login` endpoint which returns both a JWT HttpOnly cookie and a Bearer token.
The cookies keep users safe from XSS (Cross-Site Scripting) attacks and are used for authentication by the PaaSTech web interface, while the Bearer token allows users to log in via the CLI.

##### Mail

> Since sending and receiving emails is an important part of user authentication and the password reset process, we needed a way to test these functions locally without needing to connect the application to a private email every time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since sending and receiving emails is an important part of the user authentication and the password reset process, we needed a way to test these functions locally without needing to connect the application to a private email server every time.
```

After some search we came across [MailHog](https://github.com/mailhog/MailHog). MailHog allows anyone to create a temporary local SMTP server to send and receive emails through.
Even though you are not able to send emails to real email addresses, you can send and receive emails locally, which is very helpful for code testing.

> 

Reviewer: Add that now we use our university mail server

##### GRPC

To communicate with other services, especially Pomegranate and the git-repo-manager, we used [gRPC](https://grpc.io/), due to its high performance and low latency. It also allows us to easily create NestJS gRPC clients in order to communicate with the other services. Another great advantage of gRPC is that it is language agnostic, which means that we can use it to communicate with services written in other languages. Creating the `.proto` files allowed us to define contracts between the services which made it easier to develop the services independently.

##### SSH key

> To be able to push their projects to the Git server, each user needs to associate at least one SSH key to their account. Using the command line, they will then be able to push their repositories' code to the server.

Reviewer: Is it essential to talk about this here for so little content ?

Author: I added a bit more now

##### Administrators

In addition to the permissions of normal users, administrators have a few extra perks. 
Administrators are able to 
- view the non-critical information of each user (email, username)
- delete a user

> - view all SSH keys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- view every SSH keys
```

> - view all existing projects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- view every existing projects
```

Since the SSH keys stored on our server are only the public part and therefore don't pose a security risk, there is no need to hide such information from administrators.
To avoid polluting the output if the administrator only wants to see their own SSH keys, we decided to separate both requests.
At the moment, it is neither possible to become an administrator through the website, nor to appoint someone to this role.

##### User Input Validation

> One of the most important parts of an API is, to check the Client input values. Every piece of data provided by the User should follow the asked type and rules to assure the best performance and security and minimize the risk of errors occurring. To avoid checking each input individually, the verification is made using [Decorators](https://docs.nestjs.com/microservices/basics#decorators) and [Validators](https://docs.nestjs.com/pipes#class-validator) provided by NestJS. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the most important parts of an API is to check the Client input values. Every piece of data provided by the User should follow the asked type and rules to assure the best performance and security and minimize the risk of errors. To avoid checking each input individually, the verification is made using [Decorators](https://docs.nestjs.com/microservices/basics#decorators) and [Validators](https://docs.nestjs.com/pipes#class-validator) provided by NestJS. 
```

This way, the type and other necessary rules are automatically checked before even executing the code of the application and should the verification fail, the API will return a `BAD REQUEST` error.

##### Route protection

To protect each route from attacks, we secured each endpoint with [guards](https://docs.nestjs.com/guards). These classes define the rules to access different endpoints. To allow for the best user experience while keeping our application protected, three types of routes have been established:

- Public - accessible to everyone
- Private - only accessible to connected Clients
- Admin Only - only accessible to administrators

> Each time a Client connects to the API to a protected endpoint, the guards automatically check if they have the necessary authorization before taking the actual request. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each time a Client connects to a protected endpoint, the API guards automatically check if they have the necessary authorization before taking the actual request. 
```

Being a cutting-edge framework gaining more and more attention, NestJS is very versatile and stands
out from the competition by proposing two things:
1. A [list of support modules](https://www.npmjs.com/search?q=%40nestjs), which totals to 41 as of today;
2. An [extensive documentation with code examples](https://docs.nestjs.com/) ranging from basics to difficult recipes to setup.

NestJS' support modules provide a substantial support for the integration of well-known modules into the application. The main TPMs used for the API are:

- `class-validator`: validation of DTOs (Data Transfer Objects) and their properties before they are handed out to NestJS controllers
- `@nestjs/config`: ease of access to a config service, centralising both environment variables and `.env` files
- `passport` and `passport-jwt` (along with `@nestjs/passport` and `@nestjs/jwt`): layer of abstraction to handle different authentication methods, such as JWTs, OAuth2 or OIDC. Here, only the JWTs are used.
- `uuid`: generation of UUIDs v4, following [RFC 4122](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4122)

> - `nodemailer` with `handlebars`: sending of outbound emails through SMTP, with templating of HTML emails sent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `nodemailer` with `handlebars`: sending of outbound emails through SMTP, with templating of HTML emails sent
- `@nestjs/swagger` with CLI plugin: generation of OpenAPI specification (used by the web interface to generate API-related code) and running Swagger UI to simplify testing
```

Even though you are not able to send emails to real email addresses, you can send and receive emails locally, which is very helpful for code testing.

##### GRPC

To communicate with other services, especially Pomegranate and the git-repo-manager, we used [gRPC](https://grpc.io/), due to its high performance and low latency. It also allows us to easily create NestJS gRPC clients in order to communicate with the other services. Another great advantage of gRPC is that it is language agnostic, which means that we can use it to communicate with services written in other languages. Creating the `.proto` files allowed us to define contracts between the services which made it easier to develop the services independently.

##### SSH key

To be able to push their projects to the Git server, each user needs to associate at least one SSH key to their account. Using the command line, they will then be able to push their repositories' code to the server.

##### Administrators

In addition to the permissions of normal users, administrators have a few extra perks. 
Administrators are able to 
- view the non-critical information of each user (email, username)
- delete a user

> - view all SSH keys

Reviewer 2: An administrator-only route to view all projects was added in a new request.
```suggestion
- view all SSH keys
- view all existing projects
```

Since the SSH keys stored on our server are only the public part and therefore don't pose a security risk, there is no need to hide such information from administrators.
To avoid polluting the output if the administrator only wants to see their own SSH keys, we decided to separate both requests.

> At the moment, it is neither possible to become an administrator through the website, nor to appoint someone this role.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the moment, it is neither possible to become an administrator through the website, nor to appoint someone to this role.
```

- NestJS-express is nearly on par with Express for the average response time (`65.44 ms` versus `61.88 ms`)
- NestJS-express is twice as fast in maximum response time (only `325 ms` against Express' `747 ms`)
- NestJS-express can handle nearly twice as many requests concurrently, for the minimum amount doable (`14183 req/s` versus `8407 req/s`)
- NestJS-express is on par with Express for the number of requests handled concurrently, for the average amount doable (`15640` versus `16454.41`)

The API is currently running on NestJS-express v10.0.3, which just released. Two years have passed since the last benchmarks, and we can expect NestJS to be even faster as of now.

##### Authentication strategies

Regarding the authentication strategy, our team decided to create a `GET /auth/login` endpoint which returns a both an JWT HttpOnly cookie as well as a Bearer token. The cookies keep the user safe from XSS (Cross-Site Scripting) while the Bearer token allows users to log in via the CLI.

##### Mail

> With sending and receiving emails being an important part of this application for the user, we needed a local way to test these functions without actually needing to connect it to a private email every time. After some search we came across [mailhog](https://github.com/mailhog/MailHog). Mailhog allows anyone to create a temporary local smtp server and send and receive emails through it. Even though you are not able to send emails to real email adresses, you can send and receive local emails, which allowed us to test our code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since sending and receiving emails is an important part of user authentication and password reset processes, we needed a way to test these functions locally without needing to connect the application to a private email every time. After some search we came across [mailhog](https://github.com/mailhog/MailHog). Mailhog allows anyone to create a temporary local smtp server and send and receive emails through it. Even though you are not able to send emails to real email addresses, you can send and receive emails locally, which is very helpful for code testing.
```

##### GRPC

> To communicate with the other services, especially pomegranate and the git-repo-manager, we used [grpc](https://grpc.io/), due to its fast performance and low latency. It also allows us to easily create nest clients for the other services, which we can use to communicate with them. Another great advantages of grpc is that it is language agnostic, which means that we can use it to communicate with services written in other languages. Creating the proto files allowed us to define contracts between the services, which made it easier to develop the services independently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To communicate with other services, especially pomegranate and git-repo-manager, we used [grpc](https://grpc.io/), due to its high performance and low latency. It also allows us to easily create nest clients which are used to communicate with other PaaSTech services. Another great advantage of grpc is that it is language agnostic, which means that we can use it to communicate with services written in other languages. Creating the proto files allowed us to define contracts between  the services, which made it easier to develop the services independently.
```

##### SSH key

To be able to push their projects onto the Git server, each user needs to associate at least one ssh key with their account. Using the command line, they will then be able to push their repositories to the server.

##### Administrators

> In addition to the permissions of a normal users, administrators have a few extra perks. They are able to view the SSH keys of every Client as well as their personal non-critical information (email, username)- and even delete a Client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the permissions of normal users, administrators have a few extra perks. They are able to view the SSH keys of every Client as well as their personal non-critical information (email, username) and even delete a Client.
```

> In addition to the permissions of normal users, administrators have a few extra perks. They are able to view the SSH keys of every Client as well as their personal non-critical information (email, username) and even delete another user. At the moment it is neither possible to become an administrator through the website nor to appoint someone this role.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the permissions of normal users, administrators have a few extra perks. They are able to view the SSH keys of every Client as well as their personal non-critical information (email, username) and even delete other users. At the moment it is neither possible to become an administrator nor to appoint someone to this role through the website or CLI.
```

- NestJS-express is nearly on par with Express for the average response time (`65.44 ms` versus `61.88 ms`)
- NestJS-express is twice as fast in maximum response time (only `325 ms` against Express' `747 ms`)
- NestJS-express can handle nearly twice as many requests concurrently, for the minimum amount doable (`14183 req/s` versus `8407 req/s`)
- NestJS-express is on par with Express for the number of requests handled concurrently, for the average amount doable (`15640` versus `16454.41`)

The API is currently running on NestJS-express v10.0.3, which has just been released. Two years have passed since the last benchmarks, and we can expect NestJS to be even faster as of now.

##### Authentication strategies

Regarding the authentication strategy, our team decided to create a `GET /auth/login` endpoint which returns both a JWT HttpOnly cookie and a Bearer token. The cookies keep users safe from XSS (Cross-Site Scripting) attacks and are used for authentication by the PaaSTech web interface, while the Bearer token allows users to log in via the CLI.

##### Mail

> Since sending and receiving emails is an important part of user authentication and the password reset process, we needed a way to test these functions locally without needing to connect the application to a private email every time. After some search we came across [mailhog](https://github.com/mailhog/MailHog). Mailhog allows anyone to create a temporary local smtp server and send and receive emails through it. Even though you are not able to send emails to real email addresses, you can send and receive emails locally, which is very helpful for code testing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since sending and receiving emails is an important part of user authentication and the password reset process, we needed a way to test these functions locally without needing to connect the application to a private email every time. After some search, we came across [MailHog](https://github.com/mailhog/MailHog). MailHog allows anyone to create a temporary local SMTP server to send and receive emails through it. Even though you are not able to send emails to real email addresses, you can send and receive emails locally, which is very helpful for code testing.
```

##### GRPC

> To communicate with other services, especially Pomegranate and the git-repo-manager, we used [grpc](https://grpc.io/), due to its high performance and low latency. It also allows us to easily create nest clients in order to communicate with the other services. Another great advantage of grpc is that it is language agnostic, which means that we can use it to communicate with services written in other languages. Creating the proto files allowed us to define contracts between the services which made it easier to develop the services independently.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To communicate with other services, especially Pomegranate and the git-repo-manager, we used [gRPC](https://grpc.io/), due to its high performance and low latency. It also allows us to easily create Nest clients in order to communicate with the other services. Another great advantage of gRPC is that it is language agnostic, which means that we can use it to communicate with services written in other languages. Creating the `.proto` files allowed us to define contracts between the services which made it easier to develop the services independently.
```

##### SSH key

> To be able to push their projects onto the Git server, each user needs to associate at least one ssh key with their account. Using the command line, they will then be able to push their repositories to the server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To be able to push their projects to the Git server, each user needs to associate at least one SSH key with their account. Using the command line, they will then be able to push their repositories to the server.
```

##### Administrators

In addition to the permissions of normal users, administrators have a few extra perks. 
Administrators are able to 
- view the non-critical information of each user (email, username)
- delete a user
- view all SSH keys

Since the SSH keys stored on our server are only the public part and therefore don't pose a security risk, there is no need to hide such information from administrators.

> To avoid polluating the output if the administrator only wants to see their own SSH keys, we decided to separate both requests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To avoid polluting the output if the administrator only wants to see their own SSH keys, we decided to separate both requests.
```

> At the moment it is neither possible to become an administrator through the website nor to appoint someone this role.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At the moment, it is neither possible to become an administrator through the website nor to appoint someone this role.
```

#### Git controller

**_TODO: [GIT] fill for the git controller and architecture_**

#### Client applications deployment

**_TODO: [INFRA] fill for the architecture used to deploy clients' applications_**

#### Database

> The chosen database for this application is [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/). As market leader, PostgreSQL stands out for its performance and widespread use throughout the world.

Reviewer 3: Market leader? Source?

```suggestion
The chosen database for this application is [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/). As the market leader, PostgreSQL stands out for its performance and widespread use throughout the world.
```

## Architecture

### Definitions

- the Service refers to PaaSTech as a whole;
- a Client (also referred to as a User) is a user account created by an end user against the Service;
- a Project is a materialisation of a Git repository, created by a Client using either the web frontend or the CLI. A Project can be deployed by the Client by pushing its code to the Service.
- an Application (also referred to as Deployment) is an atomic unit of code, and is the result of a Project deployment. This unit is internally managed and can only be configured to a certain extent by the Client.

### Component interaction

**_TODO: [UNIFIED WORK] mermaid diagram of how components interact with eachother_**

### Database architecture

***TODO: [CLIENT] describe the database architecture, as referenced in the MCD in the README***

#### Key constraints

**_TODO: [CLIENT, INFRA] the key constraints that should never be broken by the application (or at least the external parts, like the API and container exposition) in order to maintain security, isolation and client data safety_**

#### Client sign-up and login process

##### Client states

> When signing up, the client should provide an email, a username and a password. They can then log into the software as soon as they verify their email. If needed, they can request a password reset using the "forgotten password" process. The account should be either deleted or locked/deactivated after some time of an account being active without a verified email, although this is not implemented for now.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When signing up, the client should provide an email address, a username and a password. They can then log into the software as soon as they verify their email. If needed, they can request a password reset using the "forgotten password" process. The account should be either deleted or locked/deactivated after some time of an account being active without a verified email, although this is not implemented for now.
```

### Description and intent

**_TODO: [UNIFIED WORK] write description of the software and its intent (what market needs it answers to)_**

### Technologies

Below are the technologies used for the different components of the application. We will discuss the choices that we made, and why the chosen technology fits in the ecosystem.

A list of TPMs (Third-Party Modules) might be written to give more insight about the component, but please keep in mind those lists are non-exhaustive and only the main TPMs are described.

**_TODO: [UNIFIED WORK] define the different technologies below, why they were chosen, and use arguments AND PROOFS to show research_**

#### Web application

**_TODO: [CLIENT] fill for web application frontend_**

#### CLI (Command-Line Interface)

**_TODO: [CLIENT] fill for the cli_**

#### Client API

> The Client API is one of the fundamental parts of our project. It not only handles all Client interactions, but is also the only application that is writing any data in the shared database. It notifies Pomegranate each time a project needs to be deployed and lets a user add his SSH keys to be able to connect to the local Git server. Every user request is send and verified by the API before being carried out.

Reviewer 2: We can use "their" instead of "his" to make it more gender neutral ;) Also, does the user already know what is Pomegranate in this section? Maybe we should add some cross reference or footnote? Like "(cf. chapter 3.2).
```suggestion
The Client API is one of the fundamental parts of our project. It not only handles all Client interactions, but is also the only application that can write data in the shared database. It notifies Pomegranate each time a project needs to be deployed and lets a user add their SSH keys to be able to connect to the local Git server. Every user request is send and verified by the API before being carried out.
```

- `uuid`: generation of UUIDs v4, following [RFC 4122](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4122)
- `nodemailer` with `handlebars`: sending of outbound emails through SMTP, with templating of HTML emails sent

Moreover, all of the support that NestJS provides doesn't make it slower. Benchmarks open-sourced in v7.6.13 ([available here](https://github.com/nestjs/nest/blob/e7fa96022e8b8580413490101683aabe387ca9b9/benchmarks/all_output.txt)) gave the following comparison:

- NestJS-express is nearly on par with Express for the average response time (`65.44 ms` versus `61.88 ms`)
- NestJS-express is twice as fast in maximum response time (only `325 ms` against Express' `747 ms`)
- NestJS-express can handle nearly twice as many requests concurrently, for the minimum amount doable (`14183 req/s` versus `8407 req/s`)
- NestJS-express is on par with Express for the number of requests handled concurrently, for the average amount doable (`15640` versus `16454.41`)

The API is currently running on NestJS-express v10.0.3, which just released. Two years have passed since the last benchmarks, and we can expect NestJS to be even faster as of now.

##### Authentication strategies

> Regarding the authentication strategy, our team decided to create a `GET /auth/login` endpoint which returns a both an JWT HttpOnly cookie as well as a Bearer token. The cookies keep the user safe from XSS (Cross-Site Scripting) while the Bearer token allows users to log in via the CLI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regarding the authentication strategy, our team decided to create a `GET /auth/login` endpoint which returns both a JWT HttpOnly cookie as well as a Bearer token. The cookies keep the user safe from XSS (Cross-Site Scripting) attacks while the Bearer token allows users to log in via the CLI.
```

##### GRPC

To communicate with the other services, especially pomegranate and the git-repo-manager, we used [grpc](https://grpc.io/), due to its fast performance and low latency. It also allows us to easily create nest clients for the other services, which we can use to communicate with them. Another great advantages of grpc is that it is language agnostic, which means that we can use it to communicate with services written in other languages. Creating the proto files allowed us to define contracts between the services, which made it easier to develop the services independently.

##### SSH key

To be able to push their projects onto the Git server, each user needs to associate at least one ssh key with their account. Using the command line, they will then be able to push their repositories to the server.

##### Administrators
In addition to the permissions of a normal users, administrators have a few extra perks. They are able to view the SSH keys of every Client as well as their personal non-critical information (email, username)- and even delete a Client.

> At the moment, it is not possible to get an administrator, as they don't have the right to modify other Client's information.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what "get an administrator" means. Maybe it's about not being able to become an administrator or rather make another user an administrator?

Reviewer 4: both
- being able to become an administrator
- update another user to make them an administrator

I'll try to reformulate it

#### Client sign-up and login process

##### Client states

When signing up, the client should provide an email, a username and a password. They can then log into the software as soon as they verify their email. If needed, they can request a password reset using the "forgotten password" process. The account should be either deleted or locked/deactivated after some time of an account being active without a verified email, although this is not implemented for now.

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    c : Created
    v : Verified
    d : Deleted
    r : Reset mode

    [*] --> c
    d --> [*]

    c --> v: email verification

    c --> d: after some time

    v --> r: password reset request
    r --> v: password change

    v --> d: account deletion request

```

> 

Reviewer 2: Not sure if we should talk about auth strategies here or in the API section, but I feel that we should say a few words.
```suggestion
##### Authentication strategies

Regarding the authentication strategy, our team first created a `GET /auth/login` endpoint which simply returns a JWT Bearer token to the client. It is then up to the client to store this token and include it in the headers of all requests to protected routes.

Later on, this authentication method was expanded to not only return a token, but also set a JWT token to a client as an HttpOnly cookie in order to keep the user safe from XSS (Cross-Site Scripting) attacks.

Thus, the PaaSTech website no longer has to store a token in its `localStorage`. Nevertheless, we didn't remove the Bearer authentication strategy, so that a user could log in from the CLI as well.

```

## Architecture

### Definitions

- the Service refers to PaaSTech as a whole;
- a Client (also referred to as a User) is a user account created by an end user against the Service;
- a Project is a materialisation of a Git repository, created by a Client using either the web frontend or the CLI. A Project can be deployed by the Client by pushing its code to the Service.
- an Application (also referred to as Deployment) is an atomic unit of code, and is the result of a Project deployment. This unit is internally managed and can only be configured to a certain extent by the Client.

### Component interaction

**_TODO: [UNIFIED WORK] mermaid diagram of how components interact with eachother_**

### Database architecture

***TODO: [CLIENT] describe the database architecture, as referenced in the MCD in the README***

#### Key constraints

**_TODO: [CLIENT, INFRA] the key constraints that should never be broken by the application (or at least the external parts, like the API and container exposition) in order to maintain security, isolation and client data safety_**

#### Client sign-up and login process

##### Client states

> When signing up, the client should provide an email address, a username and a password. They can then log into the software as soon as they verify their email. If needed, they can request a password reset using the "forgotten password" process. The account should be either deleted or locked/deactivated after some time of an account being active without a verified email, although this is not implemented for now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When signing up, the client should provide an email address, a username and a password. They can then log into the software as soon as they verify their email. If needed, they can request a password reset using the "forgotten password" process. The account should be either deleted or locked/deactivated after it was active without a verified email for some time, although this is not implemented right now.
```
